>> Good morning, thank you all for getting out here at such
a bright and really unnaturally early hour for programmers.
Welcome to session 205, making your application scriptable.
I'm Chris Nebel, I'm one of the engineers
in the scripting and automation group.
So, this morning, the wonders of
scripting and scriptability.
Scriptability is wonderful for
your users of your application.
They can solve real problems on their own.
It's great for you, for a whole host of reasons,
we'll be going through a bunch of those,
and it's not a whole lot of work actually.
Possibly far less than you're expecting.
If you've been following standard design practices,
you've probably written half the code you need already,
and we'll talk some more about that in a bit more detail.
Why be scriptable?
We go through a bunch of the reasons
what you'll get out of it.
Some interesting new things in Leopard
that you can do with scriptability.
And then I'll hand over to John Kaminsky
who will talk a bunch about the how.
Designing a dictionary, writing code, and testing it all.
So, let's begin.
Why be scriptable?
What am I going to get out of this?
So, first off, some of you are probably new to this.
I should say, I should clarify what
the heck I mean by scriptability.
Scriptability is simply the ability of your application
to be controlled by another application, a program,
instead of somebody sitting there
with a mouse and a keyboard.
Now, this is just like an API, and you know, you've seen
lots of different APIs, they have lots of different shapes.
We're not talking about just any sort of scriptability
here, what we're really talking about is OSA compliant.
OSA is short for Open Scripting Architecture.
It's kind of this little universe of technologies
that all work together, it's the languages,
the scriptable applications, and it's the
protocol between them using Apple events.
All that together makes up the OSA.
And the system works a lot better if all of the applications
play by similar rules, if they have a similar shape
and protocol to their scripting interface.
Means that all the applications work
at least a little bit the same way.
The Macintosh is kind of like this.
You go to any application, you know that there's
certain basic commands that work the same way, you know,
a button always does a button like
thing, a button like thing.
So, OSA compliant, and these are all written
down, they're all, it's a whole set of guidelines,
and the scripting interface guidelines which is techno 2106,
but the one particular bit that I want to call out now is
that we're talking about model scripting, not view
scripting, and this is model and view in the same sense
as model view controller, which most applications follow,
even if they weren't doing it entirely intentionally.
So, the model is your, it's what your application
actually does, it's your application's view of reality,
as it defines it, it's the actual
objects and operations that it defines.
The view is simply what that looks like on screen,
you know, the windows and menus and what not,
how you present it to the user, and when some people hear
scriptability, they think, you know, oh, I can, you know,
there's an accessibility API, right, that I can get
in by system calls and find out where all my menus
and buttons are, and I can poke those, and you know,
that's, I can write a program to do all that, I'm done.
Well, except that what you've actually
got there is view scripting,
and view scripting by its nature is extremely brittle,
it depends on precisely how your interface is laid out.
So, if you ever change your interface, if
you ever move anything around, scripts break,
and as we'll discuss more in a bit, that's bad.
Did you really want to commit to exactly
the interface you have now for all time?
Probably not.
Model scripting on the other hand, this talking directly
to what your application does, that's much more durable.
It's much more comprehensible, it changes, it
changes fairly infrequently, and when it does change,
it changes in relatively predictable ways, and
it's also easy to put in backwards compatibility
so the old scripts still keep working even though
you aren't directly revealing that stuff anymore.
So, you decided, okay, I'll start scripting and
I'll buy this, what are you going to get out of it?
The first thing you'll get as soon as you implement any
of it, is that you've got an automated testing tool now.
You've got an automated testing
tool that can test your application,
and of course you can do this to
view all sorts of useful things.
You can do regression tests, you
can, you know, make big changes,
and make sure that you didn't accidentally
change anything you didn't want to.
You can do stress testing, what happens when you throw
10,000 cards at address book, something like that.
You can validate releases before you ship
them, make sure that all the features
that are there are still working
the way they're supposed to.
So, this is all very useful.
The next thing, and again, before you even ship
this, is that you start getting to integrate
with other scriptability, other parts
of the OSA universe in the system,
so you can start writing Automator actions for instance.
You can start writing scripts, you can
write entire applications that talk
to your application using AppleScript Studio.
And you can even leverage other scriptable applications.
You can get other applications to do your work for you.
So, if you need to send a mail
message, you can talk to mail.
If you need something graphed, you can tell
Microsoft Excel to do it, if you need a diagram drawn,
you can get OmniGraph to do that for you.
There are entire applications that
are written doing nothing but this.
There's a Kinkless GTD, that's a task
management software, that's really just a set
of scripts that talks to Omni Outliner, right.
They didn't write any of their own outlining or drawing code
or anything like that, they let Omni Outliner do all of it.
Okay, so this is pretty cool already.
Now you actually ship the thing, and now
your users get to start playing with it.
So, they get about as much of benefits out of this too.
They get to solve real problems on their own, and invariably
your application doesn't do precisely what they want, right,
they need to do some sort of customization.
Scripting gives them the tool to do that.
And you know, they can do it on their own.
They don't have to come to you saying oh, I
need this feature, please, please, please.
No, they just get it done immediately, and if they, if
they talk about it, they will, scripters love to brag,
you get feedback on what they did, and so the customers
get their work done faster not only because they get
to write their own features effectively,
but because now it's automated, right.
Humans are slow and, you know, they get bored,
and they get distracted, ooh, look iPhone.
Computers don't have that problem, they'll do, you
know, they're about as smart as a box of hammers,
but they will do the same thing every time
repeatedly, and they don't mind working weekends,
or if they do, we haven't heard about it.
So, once your customers start using it, you
know, it starts to flow back to you again.
When a customer buys your application,
they aren't really buying your application.
What they're buying is a part of a solution for them,
and once they build your application into your, you know,
they're building a solution, they're building a workflow.
Once your application becomes part of that workflow,
that's the product they actually care about,
that's the product they want to keep, and
they will never get rid of your application,
as long as you're part of their workflow.
Never. They will just keep buying your application,
keep buying reps, until you break their workflow.
This is where that, you know, don't
break scriptability part comes in.
If you break their scripts, then you've broken their
solution, and yeah, they're going to start looking around.
So, finally, you get to, you get to spend less, spend
less money, or spend your money more effectively,
because you're letting your customers
doing the customization.
You don't have to write every single feature for
them, they can do a lot of it for themselves,
and you can watch what they customize, you know, by feature
customize is custom, a lot of people will be doing things
that are interesting only to them,
but you may notice that, oh, hmm,
there are a bunch of customers doing
this particular task over here,
maybe that would actually be a good
thing to add as a real feature.
So, you get out of this is that you get to spend
your time and money more effectively doing the things
that actually pay off for you and your customers.
So, that's the virtues, and there's
some new stuff in Leopard.
Some new, interesting things you
can do playing with scriptability.
First up is AppleScript.
There we go.
AppleScript is the original scripting language on the
Macintosh, it's been around for about 14 years now.
We expect it to be around for much longer.
And, you know, it's been working fine for that
time, but we're continuing to make improvements,
so in Leopard there are, there are
actually lots and lots of little things,
but two really big ones is one it's all Unicode all the
time now, so you don't have to worry about, you know,
there used to be two different string
classes in AppleScript that are like,
as many as five depending on how you counted.
You don't have to worry about that any of that stuff
anymore, and we improved the application objects.
Obviously this is kind of the art and soul of AppleScript.
You tell applications to do stuff for you.
It's a bit more flexible, and a bit easier now.
You can tell applications by ID directly, you used
to have to do this four line dance to do that.
If you need to find out an application's running, there're
a bunch of built in properties now that work just built
in to AppleScript, so if you need to
find out if an application's running,
you can ask exactly that now, and it works.
So, the really, the really interesting
one is something we call scripting bridge.
So, you know, you want to, you want to control iTunes.
You have an application, you're doing some sort of little
I thing, iTunes control, or you need to talk to iTunes.
Now, the traditional way, you know, like I said, Apple
Scripts been around for 14 years, the traditional way to do
that is you write an AppleScript to do that,
so okay, but you know, say you're going,
you're writing a real application here, you're
actually working in Objective C, so now what do you do?
Well, the gut of this communication is a protocol called
Apple Events, you know, inner process communication.
And there's a perfectly well defined
API for sending Apple events
from Objective C. It's called NS Apple event
scripter, you know, been around since I think it's been
around since Mac was ten point oh, and so, you know,
say you want to get the name of the current track
of iTunes, you know, slap that up on the screen.
Okay, no problem, all you have to do is write this.
Naturally, people lack enthusiasm for this.
So, what most people actually do is they go back to
AppleScript because there's a class to do that to,
so what you do is you write a little script, that
just, you know, literally a little AppleScript,
stick that in your application, and when time comes,
you compile and run, and you get your answer back.
And obviously this is a lot simpler, and
it works, but it doesn't work real well.
Compared to the NS Apple Event scripter, yes, it's less
effort for you, but it's a lot more effort for the computer.
You wind up spending somewhere between
ten and a hundred or even a thousand times
of execution at a time in really bad cases.
Takes a bunch of additional memory.
Getting values into the script and back out to objective
C can be kind of a pain, and the larger your script gets,
the more logic you try to stuff in there, the worse the
three other problems get, so that's problem of scaling.
So, what we wanted was something that, you know,
is easy to use, but still has the efficiency
of the direct apple events, and
that's what scripting bridge is.
So, three steps to use it.
Step one, generate a header file for the application
you're interested in, iTunes, and add it to your project,
as the command line tool to do
this, this is what it looks like.
Step two is you link to scripting
bridge dot framework, new in Leopard.
Step three, profit.
This is what the code looks like.
The first line gets a reference to the iTunes application,
and the second line gets the current tracks name,
and returns the result as a NS string, there's no
translation to, you know, NS Apple event scripter needed,
and since this is Leopard, we have Objective
C too, it even works with property syntax.
Doesn't get much simpler than that.
( Applause )
Thank you.
Talk is cheap.
Let's see a demo.
( Silence )
All right, so, little iTunes demo here.
So, this was actually inspired by Skype, a voice over
IP application, and Skype has this clever little feature
that if you're running iTunes, you're playing your music,
and a call comes in, it'll automatically pause iTunes,
and then when the, when you hang up the call, it'll start
iTunes playing again, and it's actually a little clever
about it, it fades in, so watch
the volume slider when I do this.
( Music )
So, this is written going the kind of traditional way.
It's using NS AppleScript to compile and execute an
AppleScript on the fly, and for these two buttons,
it works well enough, because these are only sending a few
events, but if you wind up in a position where you have
to send a lot of events, like this is
going to crank through, whoops, haha,
I just stole my own thunder, and ran the wrong version.
( Silence )
ITunes demo of NS AppleScript.
Okay, if you have to send a few thousand events, be
sure to act really surprised when the next one comes up.
It's actually drawing on every twentieth one, because
otherwise you might have testing drawing performance,
but it's cranking all the song titles in my
library, about 13 hundred of them, one at a time.
So, you know, we could probably do better than this.
So, if we use the scripting bridge version, then
the, you know, we can still play, and pause,
and song titles are just a little bit faster.
( Applause )
Wasn't that amazing?
Yeah. And there's one more thing to this too.
You know, I showed you the slides working,
and it's all about Objective C. This program is not
actually written in Objective C, it's written in Python.
( Applause )
Stop that.
There we go.
So, what's happening here is kind of clever.
The, there is a bridge from Python to Objective C,
it's called PyObC, it's part of the system in Leopard.
And this lets you get at basically any Objective C class.
You can just talk directly to the
Objective C runtime from Python.
So, for the old version, we're just
using NS AppleScript to do this.
And like I said, this works, but notice that, you know,
an awful lot of my code here is actually these strings
which are AppleScript, and I have to do this
odd little dance to get a result from them.
So, this is, you know, this is less than ideal.
This is what the scripting bridge version looks like.
And what happens here is actually kind of clever.
When I get a reference to the application what it actually
does is it goes out and gets the scripting interface
from iTunes, and uses that to construct Objective C
classes and methods that back everything that iTunes does,
and once you're there, I can use them just like any other
framework class, in, you know, foundation or AppKit.
So, here it is getting the name of the current track.
Here is that fade in loop again, let me get
the side by side with the AppleScript version.
So, instead of using just kind of the string, I'm
actually using, you know, looks like real Python,
or real Python luke, and it even works with collections.
So, you know, get all the tracks for I and P, whereas
with AppleScript, I had to actually, you know,
go get the count separately and then do
an injure count, and then, yeah, whatever.
All right.
Slides, please.
( silence )
So, the scripting bridge works very nicely with Python.
I use the name of the current track bit
again, and this same stunt works equally well
with any language that has equivalent Objective C bridge.
For instance Ruby.
Ruby Cocoa is built into the system in Leopard.
So, here's what the name of the
current track looks like in Ruby.
It's really quite straightforward, works very well.
So, the practical upshot of this,
there, well there are two actually.
One is that if you're on the scripting side, then
your choice of languages just got a lot bigger.
You can, you don't have to use
AppleScript if you don't want to.
If you do want to, great, believe me, we're continuing
to support it, but if you don't, then that's fine too.
Go use Ruby, go use Python, go use Objective
C, those work fine, and on the flip side,
if you are an application developer, there are a
lot more possible people using your application,
and its scriptability, and some of them are
written in objective C, maybe, you know,
these people are going to be shipping real
applications based on your scripting interface.
You really don't want to break them.
Your scripting interface is API now, you
need to take it a bit more seriously.
But a whole new world of possibilities there for
development and using scriptable applications.
And with that, I'm going to hand over to
John Kaminsky who will talk about the how.
( Applause )
>> Good morning.
My name's John Kaminsky, and I'm an engineer in the
AppleScript group, and thanks very much for being here.
So, we're part way through our talk.
We talked about why be scriptable and what's new in Leopard,
now we're going to talk about actually
how to construct this.
First step's designing a dictionary.
Very important.
We want you to spend a good chunk of time on that up front.
Then you've got to write some code to support that,
make it all work, and most importantly we want
to test it very thoroughly before you send it out.
Designing a dictionary.
This is about empowering the end user.
Chris said that you give the end user the
ability to solve real problems on their own,
and constructing a good dictionary
is the way that you do that.
We want you, and we encourage you very
strongly, to deliver an object oriented solution.
This is the most powerful thing for the scripter.
If you simply create a bunch of commands
that they can run, then you constantly have
to anticipate what their needs are going to be.
You're constantly racing to stay out in front of them.
If you give them an object oriented solution
instead, you've given them a set of tools
that they can use to construct their own solutions.
So, we really want to empower your users
rather than try to anticipate their needs.
You'll never be able to stay out ahead of them if you do.
You also achieve interoperability.
If other applications have followed our recommendations,
and given their users object oriented solutions,
and you do the same, then your application
will interact better with theirs.
The scripters will be able to create these solutions more
seamlessly, and will be less apparent that you're using two,
three, maybe even five different
programs to get the work done.
The interoperability will flow more smoothly
because similar applications behave similarly.
I draw your attention again to tech note
2106, the scripting interface guidelines.
These are a lot like the human interface guidelines.
The purpose of those was to make
applications look and feel the same.
We want to achieve the same thing with scriptability,
that the scriptability of one application
looks and feels the same as another.
That allows your scripters to construct their solutions
more seamlessly, they flow, the applications work together
as one, and whoever uses this solution begins
to think of it as just a single application.
There's a lot of information in the scripting interface
guidelines, and we want you to read it all and take it
to heart and do things the way that the guidelines say.
There's a few red flags that'll come up right away
as soon as you start designing your dictionary,
and I want to point some of them out to you.
You want to favor objects over commands.
Like I said, if you've just got a big
list of commands, you're constantly trying
to anticipate what your scripters are going to want to do.
If you favor objects over commands, then
they can recombine things in fashions
that you may not have anticipated that solve their problems.
One indication that you might be doing this wrong, is
if you've got class names that appear in your commands.
This first one here, delete front window,
that's supposed to be close front window, sorry.
That's a perfectly good line of AppleScript, that's
something that people are going to want to do,
but you don't want that to be a command name.
Delete is a verb.
Windows an object.
Front is an index.
They should really be three different things.
So, in your dictionary you're going to want
to define a window object and a delete command
and allow your users, allow your
scripters to recombine those.
Likewise, conversely, if you've got
verbs in your class or property names,
that's an indication that your dictionary might
not be designed according to the guidelines.
A very common occurrence is for the word is
to appear in the name of a Boolean property.
This is great inside your code.
This is very common inside Cocoa applications
to see method names that begin with the word is.
You want to avoid having that in your scripting
dictionary, AppleScript is an English like language.
It flows. It's been described as a read only language.
Easy to read in AppleScript and see what
it does, not necessarily easy to write one.
If this word is pops up in the middle of property names,
it's going to make your AppleScript
read in a clunky fashion.
It's going to make it hard for
people to understand what it's doing.
So, these are things to avoid.
Another thing that you want to do in your Apple
Script dictionary is hide some of the grittier details
of what's going on inside your application.
You don't necessarily want to turn
every scripter into a Cocoa programmer.
You want to let them write something that flows naturally,
makes sense, is easy to read, and actually does the job.
So, when you're hiding these gritty details, one of
the things that's going to happen is you're going
to avoid intercaps, you don't want
intercaps in your dictionary anywhere,
and likewise, you don't want any underbars in there.
If you're doing these things, it's an indication that you're
objective C backed, you're objective C back end is leaking
into your dictionary, and it's going to make
your dictionary harder for people to use.
What are you going to design?
It's hard to get started.
You don't always know what to do first, and what we suggest
that people do is to design globally and implement locally.
By that, we mean, think about the
entirety of your application.
Everything it can do.
Inventory all the objects that it has.
Inventory all the various operations it can
perform on those objects, and do that up front.
The reason being, you're going to want to support all
of this stuff at some point in time in the future,
and it's better to have names for
everything before you get started.
It's terrible to get halfway through your implementation
and realize you gave something the wrong name,
and now it's going to be very difficult for you to add
the next feature, or extend what you've already got.
Now, after you've done that, after you've created
this massive dictionary that does everything
that exposes everything that you're application does,
you're going to look at that and you're going to gasp,
and you're going to say I cannot possibly do
this in one release, what am I going to do?
We want you to scale that back, and break it into
phases for each release, and the suggestion that I give
to people is draw a little line around a few objects and
a few commands in your dictionary, and say can I solve one
or two interesting problems with just these few objects.
Am I getting feedback from the field that
people need solutions for certain things,
and if I just give them maybe three objects
and two commands, they'll be able to do that.
That's doable in a single release.
Get that done, get that dictionary into the hands
of your users, and they'll, they won't be shy,
they'll create solutions using that dictionary, and they'll
feed back to you what it is they think they need next.
And then you'll be able to spend your
time on implementing those things
that your scripters are going to be using right away.
We said before, you spend your time
where it does you the most good.
This is one of the ways.
You start this two way communication with your scripters,
and then your scripting dictionary grows release
over release, in the most important
and effective way that it can.
It's also okay to have features that are in your
GUI that don't appear in your scripting dictionary.
One example of this is finding things.
Various applications have very
sophisticated ways of finding things.
Smart folders, and smart collections
exist in a lot of applications today.
They're usually defined using a big dialogue that allows
you to construct Boolean algebra to select things based
on their properties, and create a collection that way.
It isn't absolutely necessary that
you replicate that in your scripting.
That's because AppleScript already has whose clauses.
Who's clauses are a very powerful way of
selecting objects based on their properties.
It isn't necessary that you reconstruct that.
So, you're probably not going to even if you have
a very powerful find feature in your application.
It's highly probable that you don't
have to reconstruct that in scripting,
because whose clauses actually already do that for you.
Likewise, it's okay to have scripting
only features in your application.
One example of that is the address
book has a lot of additional fields
like nickname, anniversaries, friends, spouses.
These things all appeared in scripting first, and
didn't show up in the user interface until later.
Once these properties were named, it was
pretty easy to put them in the dictionary.
It took a little bit longer to design an effective user
interface, and effective graphical user interface for them.
So, what the guys that take care of address
book did, they went ahead and put them
in the scripting interface right away, and it wasn't until
the subsequent release that they showed up in the UI.
That's okay.
All you're looking for is down the line, when you
feel you're done, that you have parallel functionality
between your graphical user interface and your scripting
interface, even if they don't look precisely the same
Where do I get this design.
Excuse me.
( silence )
The important thing is that you want to, you
want to design to an end user perception.
It's going to be end users of your
application that write these scripts,
and to the extent that you can satisfy their expectations,
to the extent that you can use the same terminology
that they're going to use, they'll find
your scripting dictionary easier to use,
and to do this I've used a technique
called a blind interview.
What's that?
It's not really like this.
You don't need a blindfold.
You don't need the bare bulb, but
the fedora, the fedora helps a lot.
Your scripting dictionary's going to reflect the
internal structure of your program to a certain extent.
Again, I said you don't want to turn
every scripter into a Cocoa programmer.
You don't have to show them all the nasty internals of your
application, but if you use Cocoa Scripting and you will,
because that's the way to go, your internal structure,
and your scripting dictionary do
have to align to a certain extent.
So, feel natural doing that.
If your internal structure and your Apple
Script dictionary parallel each other
to a certain extent, that's a good thing.
But stay within reason.
You're going to want to simplify that for people.
If you've got little helper objects that the
scripter doesn't really need to know about.
If you've got collections of things that end up acting
like a single thing, you can hide that from the user,
and this is just the classic data hiding
capability of object oriented programming.
An object behaves in a certain way.
It's not necessary that the scripter know
exactly how all of those internals are done.
As Chris mentioned, AppleScript is 14 years old
now, and 14 years ago, things were very different.
Computers were smaller, networks were slower.
This is a USB thumb drive.
It's got as much memory on it as everybody had
in this room had on their Macintosh 14 years ago.
So, 14 years ago, the correct solution was 4 byte codes.
Every entry in your dictionary has a
human readable term associated with it.
It's also got a 4 byte code associated with it.
That's the information that travels
back and forth in the apple events,
so when you're creating your dictionary you're going to
need to assign 4 byte codes to the human readable terms,
and one of the biggest stumbling blocks is how do I do this?
Where do I get this information.
The important thing, the important message that we want to
get to you is consistency with other existing applications.
If a human readable term is in use, in other
AppleScript dictionaries, you want to copy that,
and you want to copy the 4 byte code that goes with it.
This makes your application interact
better with other applications.
It makes your application interact better with scripting
additions which behave as though they were part
of the language, and they make your application
interact better with AppleScript itself
which has a lot of predefined terminology.
So, the bottom line is if you use the same human
readable term, use the same 4 byte code and vice versa.
Where do I find them?
If you go to the developer site and search for apple
event codes, the first hit you get will be a web page
that we've constructed that's got 3000 pairs
of human readable terms and 4 byte codes.
Start there, and if you can find the human
term that you're looking for on that list,
go ahead and use the 4 byte code that's associated with it.
If you don't fine your term and you have to
invent something new, then the converse is true.
Make sure you pair that term up with a 4
byte code that is not in use by anyone else.
And when you're done, all of this
goes into a scripting definition file.
The scripting definition file is the newest format.
We've gong through a series of iterations
on this, back in system 7, 8, and 9,
we had AETE resources which were
difficult to construct and read.
When system 10 came along, we had script suite, and
script terminology files, which were a little bit better,
but sometimes difficult to work with, and
now we've gone to scripting definition files.
All the old ones still work.
If you've got an existing scriptable application that uses
an AETE or script suite or script terminology, don't worry,
it's going to keep working, but the
scripting definition file is more expressive.
You can include documentation, you can include
examples, you can include links to outside information
that will help people interpret
your dictionary and use it better,
and here in orange are the things
that you're going to have to invent.
There's the term, this is a chunk
from the sketch scripting definition.
Sketch is the canonical sample code that we
make available to you for Cocoa and AppKit,
and since Cocoa Scripting is part of AppKit, sketch is
a Cocoa scriptable application, and in its dictionary,
it defines something called a graphic, and a
graphic is just anything you can draw in sketch.
A rectangle, a circle, a straight line, a chunk of
text, and it's associated with the 4byte code GRPH,
and it's implemented by a Cocoa class SKT
graphic, and it's in the scripting definition file
that you associate these three things together,
so when your scripter types the word graphic,
when your script editor translates that into
a 4 byte code in order to send an apple event
and when that apple event arrives in the sketch
application, these three terms are tied together.
Once you're done designing your dictionary, you're going to
need to write some code to back it up, and as Chris said,
if you're following existing conventions, a
lot of this code is going to already be there.
And there's several different things
that you're going to have to create.
You're going to have to create element accessors that allow
you to get at the objects that your application knows about,
you're going to have to do some element management so that
you can grow and shrink those collections as appropriate.
You're going to want to have property accessors
that allow you to get at the information
that makes one object different form another, and
you're going to have to implement some commands.
Element accessors come in several different types, but
you're going to have to do at least one of these two.
The first one here is also from the sketch application.
It's the accessor that allows you to get at
the graphics that are inside a given document.
Since the number of graphics inside a given
document is likely to be relatively small,
and that collection of graphics is going to be
around all the time because it needs to be redrawn,
it's really going to be pretty easy to
just return an array of graphics objects.
It already exists inside your application, you
don't have to write any new code to do this.
So, the first accessor here just
provides the entire collection at once.
Cocoa Scripting will grab the entire
collection and do whatever is necessary
to select the object the scripter is looking for.
If your collections are bigger, or
perhaps don't exist at all times,
you're going to want to be able to
do this in a more efficient way.
The example here still uses graphics.
You notice that we're establishing a naming convention here.
The term graphics is repeated over and over again in
these accessors and that relates them all together,
and relates them back to the scripting
definition so that Cocoa Scripting can find them.
Cocoa Scripting uses your scripting definition file at
runtime to dispatch the events to the proper accessors.
If you collection is large, or does not always exist, a good
example here would be all of the characters in document.
You don't necessarily want a Cocoa object representing
every character in a document hanging around all the time.
That's a lot of overhead for something
that might never get used.
You can implement access to those characters, or in this
case still graphics, by providing a pair of accessors,
one which will give the count of
how many of these things there are,
and one that will give you back exactly one object at a time
based on the index, and again, Cocoa Scripting knows how
to use this, and will use it to construct an
answer to whatever it is the scripters looking for.
You can implement one or the other of these or both,
but you're going to have to have one or the other.
>> ( Pause )
>> Probably.
>> Yeah. There's other ways of getting at your elements
as well that if your backend supports an efficient way
of getting at things by name, perhaps you've got
some hashing algorithm that can take the name,
munch on it somehow, and then grab the object directly,
you can do that, and Cocoa Scripting will help you.
You provide another accessor called valuing graphics with
name, and then instead of asking for the entire collection,
or asking for something by index or going through
the entire collection looking for one that happens
to match a certain name, Cocoa Scripting will ask for you
to hunt through the collection and get something by name.
If you believe that you can do a
better job than a simple linear search,
then you'll want to implement something like this.
Likewise you can access objects by a unique ID.
If the back end of your application is a real
live database and it can get at things using a key
and it can do it really fast, then you're probably going
to want to implement valuing graphics with unique ID
or valuing object name with unique ID, and that'll
pass back one object that matches that unique ID,
giving you access to the power of your
backend which happens to be a database.
Some collections are static, for example the disc drives
on the, oh no, that's not exactly, that's not a good one.
The monitors, the monitors available
on your machine is relatively static.
You can't connect a new monitor without
turning your machine off and back on again,
so what you want to, but not all collections are like that.
Most collections vary in size over time, and you're
going to want to be able to create new things and get rid
of old things, and again, Cocoa script is going to
help you do that, and extending this naming pattern,
you can insert a graphic into the collection of graphics.
I've got two different accessors here.
That's because you've got two different
options of how to do this.
If order is important you might want to be able
to, and your scripter might want to be able
to insert an object at a particular point in the collection.
If order isn't important, or order has some kind
of natural definition, then you can insert objects
into the collection without specifying an index.
A good example of both, actually, is a window.
Normally, if you create a new window, you simply want it
to show up in front of all the other the other windows.
You're creating it because you're going
to do something with it right now.
And in that case, the first accessor here would be
sufficient, but it's also true if you're doing something
in an automated fashion, that you might want to
create a window, and you don't want it in front.
You want it behind all the other windows, so in
that case you'd want to use the second accessor,
so again you can do one of these or both.
There's a good chance that you're
going to end up doing both.
When you're done with a window,
you're going to want to get rid of it.
You're going to want to remove it from the collection, and
you do that with the remove from collection name and index,
and this is going to find the object using the index,
and tell the owner of that collection to get rid of it.
So, you can manage the size and contents of your collections
this way, and the last one here is object specifier.
Element identification via an object specifier.
Every good scriptable object is capable of
providing an object specifier for itself,
and you can think of an object
specifier as like a return address.
If I wanted to get back to this
object later, how would I do that?
A command that creates an object should
return as its result an object specifier.
The scripter can then take that object
specifier, stick it in a variable, hang onto it,
and get back to that same object later on.
Some object specifiers are better than others.
Index object specifiers are somewhat weak.
If the contents of the collection changes, then the
meaning of an index object specifier may also change.
Object specifiers by name are better, but because Apple
Script allows non-unique names, they can be ambiguous.
The most specific and exacting kind of object
specifier is an object specifier by unique ID.
It's up to you when you write this object
specifier routine what kind you're going to return.
You're going to want to have your scripter's
end use perception in mind when you do this.
If people normally call things by name, you're probably
going to want to use by name object specifiers.
Again if your backend is a database, and your
scriptors know,hey, I'm manipulating a database,
then unique ID objects specifiers are the right thing, and
if you don't have that kind of information available to you,
index object specifiers will work, but
like I said, they have their limitations.
The thing that makes one object different
than another is the value of its properties.
If you want to do interesting things
with your objects, search through them,
find objects that have certain properties,
you're going to want to have property accessors.
You're going to want to be able to
get and set the values of properties,
and here's a pair of property accessors
for the name of an object.
These fit a pattern called KVC, Key Value Coding.
Key Value Coding is a technology
that allows cocoa applications
to introspect their object and
find out what properties they have.
It's used in lots of different places.
It's used in bindings, it's used in
core image, it's used in core data.
If you're using any of these technologies,
you probably already have a lot
of Key Value Coding compliant code
in your application already.
And that's great.
Because when you go to do scripting, that
means you don't need to write anything new.
But Key Value Coding is actually more powerful than that.
It can actually get right at the instance variables of your
objects directly without you creating an accessors at all,
as long as you stick to this naming convention.
That instance variable there underscore
name will be treated exactly the same way
as that pair of accessors get name and set name.
So, in this instance you don't have to write any kind
of code at all, and if you're objective c two point oh,
and you use objective c two point oh property
definitions, they're automatically KVC compliant.
You're going to get that functionality
for free just because you're using the
at property definition for your instance variables.
So, like we said, you probably already have a lot of
this code already and don't need to write anything knew.
The last thing you're going to want to do
is commands, and I do mean the last thing.
There's 13 built in commands in the AppleScript language.
We believe that those 13 commands will cover
about 80 percent of what you need to do.
You don't want to add new commands
if an existing command will do.
Particularly get and set.
Getting and setting properties can often do what you
want done rather than creating a complex custom command.
But it is going to happen.
Your application does something unique.
Your application has some value added
functionality that no one else has
so there is no command to do what your application does.
In that case, you're going to want
to go ahead and create commands.
The examples that we gave last year, we used the sketch
sample code again, was to take a couple of features
that were present in the graphical user interface, but not
in the scriptability, and to go ahead and implement them,
and we chose two different ones to give an
example of the two different kinds of commands.
The first kind of command is object first dispatching.
A lot of objects act independently and can implement
their responses to certain commands independently.
Good example of this is rotate.
If you tell something to rotate in sketch, you can tell
one object to rotate, you can tell a collection of objects
to rotate, but in the end, each
object functions independently.
It rotates through 90 degrees all by
itself, and it doesn't need to know anything
about anything that's going on
with any of the other objects.
In that case, you're going to want to use object
first dispatching, and the way that you do that is
that you simply add a method to the graphics object itself
called rotate, reference it in your scripting definition,
and then Cocoa Scripting will route any
rotate commands directly to that object,
and if the scripter actually tells a collection of
objects to rotate, Cocoa Scripting will call each
of those objects one at a time, and tell them to rotate.
There's other kinds of commands that aren't like that.
There's other kinds of commands that act
in aggregate on an entire collection.
And example from sketch is align.
You can't tell one object to align.
An object has to align to something else.
Typically what you do is you tell a collection
of objects to align their vertical centers.
Well, you can't do that by sending a
message to each object individually.
The objects are going to have to
know about each other somehow,
so that they can find their vertical centers and align them.
In that case, you're going to want
to do command first dispatching.
The way you do that is you create a sub
class of the NS script command class,
and you implement a perform default implementation method,
and the perform default implementation
method doesn't have any inputs at all,
reason being it's a method on the command itself.
If you need to know anything about the command, whether it's
align to the vertical centers, or the horizontal centers,
or the left edges, that's present in the command itself,
and the command can just introspect
itself to find that information.
And the difference between a command first
dispatched command, and an object first dispatch,
is that the command first dispatch can act on
the entire collection of objects all at once.
So, you can see, depending upon the functionality it
will be appropriate to do one of these or the other.
Cocoa Scripting uses your application as a set of
call backs, and it will call your element accessors,
and your property accessors in order to answer
the questions that the scripter has asked.
And it does this in a very predictable and logical fashion,
but when you first get started, there's going to be a lot
that you don't know, and typically the way
that you figure out how your programs working
or not working is by setting break points.
It can be very frustrating setting break points when Cocoa
Scriptings using your application as a set of callbacks.
You don't know what's going to happen next.
You can set a break point, and it'll never get hit,
and then you're left wondering what's going on?
Why am I not coming through this part of my code?
What did I do wrong in my code?
What did I do wrong in my dictionary?
One way to learn how Cocoa Scripting uses
your application, what it calls and when,
is to put in some kind of logging mechanism,
and when I first started doing this,
I used a very simple logging mechanism, just a
couple of macros that allowed me to call NS log,
and allowed me to turn this off
when I built my deployment version.
And from this I learned a lot about how Cocoa
Scripting worked, what it called me for, when,
and what it expected back as its answers.
And I strongly encourage that you do this.
That you log every accessor call, every event
handler, and any significant processing that you do.
If you take a branch inside your code that's going
to cause you to do something significantly different,
log that as well, so that you can follow what's going on.
After awhile, with the help of Brooke
Callahan, one of the members of our group,
I made this considerably fancier,
and added a lot of automated stuff.
I found myself typing over and over again the name of the
method that I was in, the name of the file that I was in.
I've added this all to my logging macro automatically.
Now, simply by changing the value on that if
statement, I can turn this logging mechanism on and off,
and use it to find out what Cocoa Scripting is
doing, and again, I put these things everywhere.
Every single routine and every single object I've put one
of these logging macros in there, and now since I don't have
to type in a lot of additional information, it's
really very easy, just a lot of copy and paste.
So, when you turn this on, well, you can't turn this
on because you don't have the source to system advance,
but I can turn it on, these are the messages that I get.
If I tell system events to get script menu enabled, script
menu enabled means that up in the upper right hand corner
of my menu bar, there's a little script icon that I
can pull down and select scripts that I use commonly
and frequently to control my scriptable applications.
Again, this is part of that lock in.
If you put scripts in this, if you make your application
scriptable, and you put scripts in the script menu,
people will get used to using them, and they will use
your program over and over again because it's easy.
When you run this, these are some examples
of the logging that you'll get back.
First thing in there is my initials.
I put my initials in there because there maybe
more than one engineer working on this project,
and I want to be able to tell what
in the console log came from me.
Mark Pitcherelli will be speaking this afternoon,
and he'll tell you that when you're
debugging your scriptable application,
you should leave the console window open all the time
because there's a wealth of information in there.
To filter out my logging from that wealth of
information, I put my initials in every logging message.
I also have the name of the file,
and the line number that I'm on.
This gives me pretty specific information.
If something goes wrong, if some part of the foundation
throws an exception because I've sent it some bad data,
right before that, there's a line of code, if I go look
at that line of code, I almost always find my problem.
Again, I put in the name of the method that I'm
executing at the time, which can be helpful as well,
and it's also possible for me to put in specific
information about the input to that particular method.
If I'm in the delicate handles key method,
it's interesting to know what the key is,
because that will tell me what I expect the answer to be.
And again, I've put these things everywhere.
Put them in your application, turn them on, run a couple
of sample scripts, see what Cocoa Scripting is doing.
That makes it a lot easier for you
to go back later and set break points
and see what is going right and what's going wrong.
When you're done, you're going to want to test this all.
You're going to want to make sure it works right,
and probably the most important reason why you want
to do this is you've given your end users automated
regression testing tool, it's called scriptability.
They will run their scripts that they've been
running on previous versions of your application.
They'll write new scripts.
They'll find your bugs.
They'll find your mistakes.
If you create an embarrassing regression,
and let it slip through, they'll find it.
So, what you want to do is make sure that you do that first.
Your testing is going to parallel your code development.
You're going to test your element accessors, your element
management, your property access, and your commands.
All that code that you wrote, you're going to want
to have test cases for each and every one of them.
When you're accessing your elements, there's lots
of different ways you can do that in AppleScript
and you want to make sure you test them all.
You can get the entire collection.
You can get all the graphics that sketch has
in a particular document at a particular time.
Regardless of how that's implemented, whether
it's done through the entire collection accessor,
or if it's done through the count and index
accessor, you want to make sure that it works.
You're also going to want to get things by name and by ID.
Whether you've implemented those special
accessors or not, somebody has to match that name.
Somebody has to match that ID.
It's either your code, or Cocoa Scripting.
You want to make sure that that works Accessing by index
is relatively simple, but again, you want to test it,
because if there's anything wrong your
users, your scripters, will catch it.
There's some other ways to access things.
There's some indexes that have names.
You can grab the middle object out of a collection, or you
can grab some randomly chosen object out of a collection.
You want to test those and make sure that they work.
AppleScript supports negative indexes, which
count backwards from the end of a collection.
You're going to want to test that and make sure
that works, and the last and most importantly,
you're going to want to test whose clauses.
The power of the AppleScript language
is in the whose clause.
It allows the scripter to describe what it is he
wants rather than just say this one here, number five.
If he wants to describe an object that he's seeking or a
collection of objects that he's seeking based on the values
of their properties, say all of the customers in the local
zip code, he's going to use a whose clause to do that.
Cocoa Scripting is going to help you out
a lot in implementing these whose clauses.
You don't have to write much code, if any, to get
these things to work, but you want to test them.
You want to make sure that they work.
You want to make sure that your scripters get
sensible answers, and that they get the same answers
over and over again from release to release.
So, make sure that you've got some interesting
and powerful whose clauses as part of testing.
Element management, you're going to
want to create and delete things.
Again, here's a sketch example of making a
new circle with certain properties, and again,
you're going to want to delete things from your collection.
Very often, everything works until you try to delete
the last object, and then something goes horribly wrong.
You want to make sure that you test that situation
before your code gets out to your scripters.
You're going to want to get out
all the properties of an object.
Cocoa Scripting supports for you getting all the properties
at once, but again you want to make sure that it works.
It uses your application as a set of callbacks.
When the scripter says get properties of rectangle one,
the first rectangle object is going to be called over
and over again to query each of its properties,
and Cocoa Scriptings going to do that for you,
but you want to make sure that that kind of access works.
And you want to be able to get at
each of the properties by its name,
so you want to include all of that in your testing as well.
Some properties are read only,
some properties are read write.
For the read write properties in your
application, you're going to want to test
that that works, and we want you to do repeatable tests.
We want you to put things back they way they were when
you started, so we suggest a get set rest pattern.
So, get the width of an object of one of the
graphics in sketch, and save a new variable.
Then change the width of that object, then change it back
to what it was before, and make sure that that all works.
There are edge cases.
The width of something probably shouldn't be
any less than 0, but it could conceivably be 0.
You want to make sure that that works correctly.
And then there's error cases.
You want to force your application right up to the limits
of what it can do, and then push it over the edge case
into the error case, and make sure
that the scripter gets back some kind
of descriptive error message that
they can use to solve the problem.
Again Mark Pitcherelli will be talking this afternoon about
the greatly improved error reporting in Cocoa Scripting.
You want to make sure that you get those errors, and
that your scripters will be able to interpret them
and fix their scripts, so you want
to make that part of your testing.
With the commands, if you create any new commands of
your own, you're certainly going to want to make sure
that they work, and you're also going to want
to test the built in commands that are part
of the AppleScript language, and you're going
to want to do this in several different ways.
You're going to want to make sure that if you don't
provide any parameters at all, you just simply tell sketch
to make a new circle, that it does something
predictable and perhaps even useful.
If you make a new circle in sketch, it's going to
put it at some default location in the document.
It's going to give it some default size.
You want to make sure that's what
the scripters going to expect.
You also want to make sure that
when you specify all the properties
of a newly created object, that that works as well.
And again, you want to take edge cases and
error cases and make sure that they work,
and give the scripter feedback that's going to be
meaningful to them, so that they aren't surprised
when they write their script and it doesn't
do exactly what they wanted it to do.
And here is a good place to mention stress testing.
Chris said earlier what happens to Address
Book when you throw 10,000 cards at it.
You're going to want to test your
application that way as well.
What happens to sketch when you make 10,000 circles.
It's slow, that's what happens to sketch when you make
10,000 circles, but it's sample code, and it's instructive.
You want to make sure that your application responds
in a way that's going to make the scripters happy.
And this is a really important part.
We told you earlier that scriptability
will build loyalty with your customers.
Once they've made your application part of an automated
workflow, they're not going to get rid of you.
They're going to keep you around forever,
but only if you don't break their scripts.
One of the best ways to make sure that you
don't break their scripts is to get a hold
of their scripts and make them part of your testing.
Chris mentioned Kinkless GTD.
We use that as a test ourselves to make sure that we haven't
done anything that breaks the scripting of Omni Outliner
to the extent that Kinkless GTD doesn't work anymore.
If that happened, that would be bad.
There's lots and lots of people
out there that use Kinkless GTD.
They have a tendency to be CEOs and CFOs
and we don't want to disappoint them.
We want to make sure that they keep signing
those checks and keep buying our products.
So, if you get your real world scripters, real
world scripts, and make them part of your testing,
then you know that you're not going
to break their automated workflow,
and you do this by monitoring your feedback sources.
If you've got a mailing list, if you've got a blog,
if you've got a user community out there that's active
and interchanges this information, you're going to want to
tap into that, and if you see a really interesting script,
you're going to want to grab it, and you're going to
add appropriate to your testing methodology to make sure
that you don't break any of these things, and again,
you're going to want this all to be repeatable.
You want to retain your prior results, and you want to
do some kind comparison between what's happening now,
and what was happening in the prior
release, and you want to detect regressions.
Some of the changes are going to be
there because you want them there.
Some of the changes are going to
be there because you fixed the bug.
But there's going to be other changes that
crop up that you don't want to have there.
You want to catch those at the
earliest possible moment and fix them.
Like I said, you're giving your scripters
an automated regression testing tool.
They are going to catch your mistakes
better than you catch them first.
So, we've dumped a lot on you today, and if you need
more information, here's some people that you contact.
You may already know Sal Soghoian,
our product marketing manager.
He can help you in many, many ways.
He's a very experienced scripter himself, and knows
a lot of the scriptable applications out there.
If you're looking for solutions, he may have the answer.
John Montbriand is our contact at
developer technical services.
If you have questions about coding about developing
dictionaries, go straight to DTS and ask for John.
And we talked about the Technote 2106, the scripting
interface guidelines, there's the URL for that.
I talked about the webpage with the 3000
4 byte codes, there's a URL for that,
and there's going to be a page for this particular session.
If you go to developer dot apple dot com, wwwdc 2007 and
look  up session 205, you'll find a list of about eight
or ten documents and links to sample
code, guidelines, and other documentation
that can help you get started in
making your application scriptable.
There's also going to be a lab this afternoon.
I mentioned Mark Piccirelli's session, those of you
that want more, who are maybe a little bit farther along
in making your application scriptable, or are
just interested in what the newest developments
in Leopard are, are going to want to go to that.
Immediately after that, in the labs downstairs in section D,
we're going to be having our application
scripting laboratory.
If you're eager to get started, you can start before that.
After this session's over, I'm going to take a
little break, and then I'll be down in the lab.
Just come down, tell the concierge there that you're looking
for AppleScript help, somebody will be there to help you.
You don't have to wait till 3:30 this afternoo0n.
But don't miss Mark's session, there's
a lot of important stuff there too.
So, in summary, what this is about is giving
your customers, your scripters the ability
to solve their real world problems themselves, so
that you don't have to constantly be at their beck
and call to add tiny little features
that have small audiences.
The developers, you don't spend as
much time hunting for regressions.
Your automated scripting, your automated testing
can do that for you, and you spend more time
on the most beneficial features because
you've gotten feedback from your customers
as to what those beneficial features ought to look like.
And your customers are going to spend a lot less time
doing the same thing over and over and over again.
Their experience with your application is going
to be much more friendly, much more happy,
because they're going to do something a couple of times,
they're going to like it, and then
they're going to automate it.
And in the end, they're going to spend more money on your
software because it's now part of their everyday lives.